add support for running mul invocations in parallel (#4909)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dbt-commands.md

You can run dbt using the following tools:

- In your browser with the [dbt Cloud IDE](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud) 

> - On the command line interface using the [dbt Cloud CLI](/docs/cloud/cloud-cli-installation) or open-source [dbt Core](/docs/core/installation-overview), both of which enable you to execute dbt commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the command line interface using the [dbt Cloud CLI](/docs/cloud/cloud-cli-installation) or open-source [dbt Core](/docs/core/installation-overview).
```

  
A key distinction with the tools mentioned, is that dbt Cloud CLI and IDE are designed to support safe parallel execution of dbt commands, leveraging dbt Cloud's infrastructure and its comprehensive [features](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features). In contrast, `dbt-core` _doesn't support_ safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process. Learn more in the [parallel execution](#parallel-execution) section.

## Parallel execution

dbt Cloud allows for parallel execution of commands, enhancing efficiency without compromising data integrity. This enables you to run multiple commands at the same time, however it's important to understand which commands can be run in parallel and which can't.

In contrast, [`dbt-core` _doesn't_ support](/reference/programmatic-invocations#parallel-execution-not-supported) safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process, and requires users to manage concurrency manually to ensure data integrity and system stability.

dbt commands are categorized into the following types:

| Command type | Description | <div style={{width:'200px'}}>Example</div> |
|------|-------------|---------|

> | **Write** | These commands perform actions that change data or metadata in your data platform.<br /><br /> Limited to one invocation at any given time (1 parallelism). This is to prevent any potential conflicts, such as overwriting the same table in your data platform, at the same time. | `dbt build`<br />`dbt run` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Write** | These commands perform actions that change data or metadata in your data platform.<br /><br /> Limited to one invocation at any given time. This is to prevent any potential conflicts, such as overwriting the same table in your data platform, at the same time. | `dbt build`<br />`dbt run` |
```

> | **Read** | These commands involve operations that fetch or read data without making any changes to your data platform.<br /><br /> Can have multiple invocations in parallel and aren't limited to one invocation at any given time. This means read commands can run in parallel with other read commands and write commands.| `dbt parse`<br />`dbt compile`|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Read** | These commands involve operations that fetch or read data without making any changes to your data platform.<br /><br /> Can have multiple invocations in parallel and aren't limited to one invocation at any given time. This means read commands can run in parallel with other read commands and a single write command.| `dbt parse`<br />`dbt compile`|
```

| [seed](/reference/commands/seed) | Loads CSV files into the database |  Write | ❌ | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) |
| [show](/reference/commands/show) | Preview table rows post-transformation | Read | ✅ |  All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) |
| [snapshot](/reference/commands/snapshot) | Executes "snapshot" jobs defined in a project |  Write | ❌ | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) |
| [source](/reference/commands/source) | Provides tools for working with source data (including validating that sources are "fresh") |  Read | ✅ | All tools<br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) |
| [test](/reference/commands/test) | Executes tests defined in a project  |  Read | ✅ | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) |
| [--version](/reference/commands/version) | Displays the currently installed version of dbt CLI |  N/A  | N/A | dbt Core, dbt Cloud CLI  <br />  All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | <br />

> Note that some have 'N/A" since they're not relevant to the parallelization of dbt commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that some have "N/A" since they're not relevant to the parallelization of dbt commands.
```

Author: great catch!

- On the command line interface using the [dbt Cloud CLI](/docs/cloud/cloud-cli-installation) or open-source [dbt Core](/docs/core/installation-overview).
  
A key distinction with the tools mentioned, is that dbt Cloud CLI and IDE are designed to support safe parallel execution of dbt commands, leveraging dbt Cloud's infrastructure and its comprehensive [features](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/dbt-cloud-features). In contrast, `dbt-core` _doesn't support_ safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process. Learn more in the [parallel execution](#parallel-execution) section.

## Parallel execution

dbt Cloud allows for parallel execution of commands, enhancing efficiency without compromising data integrity. This enables you to run multiple commands at the same time, however it's important to understand which commands can be run in parallel and which can't.

In contrast, [`dbt-core` _doesn't_ support](/reference/programmatic-invocations#parallel-execution-not-supported) safe parallel execution for multiple invocations in the same process, and requires users to manage concurrency manually to ensure data integrity and system stability.

> dbt commands are categorized into the following types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dbt commands can be `read` or `write` commands:
```

| Command type | Description | <div style={{width:'200px'}}>Example</div> |
|------|-------------|---------|

> | **Write** | These commands perform actions that change data or metadata in your data platform.<br /><br /> Limited to one invocation at any given time. This is to prevent any potential conflicts, such as overwriting the same table in your data platform, at the same time. | `dbt build`<br />`dbt run` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Write** | These commands perform actions that change data or metadata in your data platform.<br /><br /> Limited to one invocation at any given time, which prevents any potential conflicts, such as overwriting the same table in your data platform at the same time. | `dbt build`<br />`dbt run` |
```

| **Read** | These commands involve operations that fetch or read data without making any changes to your data platform.<br /><br /> Can have multiple invocations in parallel and aren't limited to one invocation at any given time. This means read commands can run in parallel with other read commands and a single write command.| `dbt parse`<br />`dbt compile`|

> To ensure your dbt workflows are both efficient and safe, you can run different types of dbt commands at the same time (in parallel) &mdash; for example, `dbt build` (write operation) can safely run alongside `dbt parse` (read operation) at the same time. However, you can't run `dbt build` and `dbt run` (both write operations) at the same time.

Reviewer 2: non blocking suggestion. If you move this example before the table, it might feel more cohesive with the other content.

| [run](/reference/commands/run) | Runs the models in a project | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Write | ❌ |
| [run-operation](/reference/commands/run-operation) | Invoke a macro, including running arbitrary maintenance SQL against the database | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Write | ❌ |
| [seed](/reference/commands/seed) | Loads CSV files into the database | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Write | ❌ |
| [show](/reference/commands/show) | Preview table rows post-transformation | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Read | ✅ |
| [snapshot](/reference/commands/snapshot) | Executes "snapshot" jobs defined in a project | All tools <br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Write | ❌ |
| [source](/reference/commands/source) | Provides tools for working with source data (including validating that sources are "fresh") | All tools<br /> All [supported versions](/docs/dbt-versions/core) | Read | ✅ |
| [test](/reference/commands/test)

> 

Reviewer: What about the following?

The following sections outline the commands supported by dbt and their relevant flags. They are available in all tools and all [supported versions](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-versions/core) unless noted otherwise.

|    Command    |                                         Description                                         | Parallel execution with other commands |                Caveats                |
|:-------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:--------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------:|
| build         | Build and test all selected resources (models, seeds, snapshots, tests)                     | ❌                                      |                                       |
| cancel        | Cancels the most recent invocation.                                                         | N/A                                    | dbt Cloud CLI only dbt v1.6 or higher |
| clean         | Deletes artifacts present in the dbt project                                                | ✅                                      |                                       |
| clone         | Clone selected models from the specified state                                              | ❌                                      | dbt v1.6 or higher                    |
| compile       | Compiles (but does not run) the models in a project                                         | ✅                                      |                                       |
| debug         | Debugs dbt connections and projects                                                         | ✅                                      | dbt Cloud IDE, dbt Core only          |
| deps          | Downloads dependencies for a project                                                        | ✅                                      |                                       |
| docs          | Generates documentation for a project                                                       | ✅                                      |                                       |
| environment   | Enables you to interact with your dbt Cloud environment.                                    | N/A                                    | dbt Cloud CLI only dbt v1.5 or higher |
| help          | Displays help information for any command                                                   | N/A                                    |                                       |
| init          | Initializes a new dbt project                                                               | ✅                                      | dbt Core only                         |
| list          | Lists resources defined in a dbt project                                                    | ✅                                      |                                       |
| parse         | Parses a project and writes detailed timing info                                            | ✅                                      |                                       |
| reattach      | Reattaches to the most recent invocation to retrieve logs and artifacts.                    | N/A                                    | dbt Cloud CLI only dbt v1.6 or higher |
| retry         | Retry the last run dbt command from the point of failure                                    | ❌                                      | dbt v1.6 or higher                    |
| run           | Runs the models in a project                                                                | ❌                                      |                                       |
| run-operation | Invoke a macro, including running arbitrary maintenance SQL against the database            | ❌                                      |                                       |
| seed          | Loads CSV files into the database                                                           | ❌                                      |                                       |
| show          | Preview table rows post-transformation                                                      | ✅                                      |                                       |
| snapshot      | Executes "snapshot" jobs defined in a project                                               | ❌                                      |                                       |
| source        | Provides tools for working with source data (including validating that sources are "fresh") | ✅                                      |                                       |

Note that some dbt commands aren't listed in the following table since they're not relevant to the parallelization of dbt commands.

| Command          | Type       | Parallel execution <br /> with other commands |
| :-----------------: | :----------:|:------------------:|
| `build`          | Write  |     ❌             |
| `clone`          | Write  |     ❌              |
| `retry`          | Write  |     ❌             |
| `run`            | Write  |     ❌             |
| `run-operation`  | Write  |     ❌             |
| `seed`           | Write  |     ❌             |
| `snapshot`       | Write  |     ❌             |
| `clean`          | Read |      ✅           |
| `compile`        | Read |      ✅           |
| `debug`          | Read |      ✅           |
| `deps`           | Read |      ✅           |
| `docs`           | Read |      ✅           |
| `init`           | Read |      ✅           |
| `list`           | Read |      ✅           |
| `parse`          | Read |      ✅           |
| `show`           | Read |      ✅           |
| `source`         | Read |     ✅           |

> | `test`           | Read |     ✅           |

Reviewer: What do you think about adding the "parallel execution" column to the 
[available commands](https://docs-getdbt-owu0eidj8-dbt-labs.vercel.app/reference/dbt-commands#available-commands) table instead?

<img width="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/44704949/67774541-17fd-4524-b8ac-9bd66e2b1071">

Author: i did tihnk about this too @dbeatty10 but I stopped short of it bc i thought it was looking too 'busy' - wdyt? 
![Screenshot 2024-02-20 at 14 24 04](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/89008547/63dc3e0f-f7a0-4d8f-b4a1-dc3e987b61fa)

Reviewer 3: I like this idea!

Author: ok ya'll going to do this!

For a detailed view of which commands can execute in parallel, expand and check out the following table:
<expandable alt_header="Detailed table of parallel execution commands.">

The following table highlights write or read commands and whether you can execute them in parallel with each other. 

Note that some dbt commands aren't listed in the following table since they're not relevant to the parallelization of dbt commands.

| Command          | Type       | Parallel execution <br /> with other commands |
| :-----------------: | :----------:|:------------------:|
| `build`          | Write  |     ❌             |
| `clone`          | Write  |     ❌              |
| `retry`          | Write  |     ❌             |
| `run`            | Write  |     ❌             |
| `run-operation`  | Write  |     ❌             |
| `seed`           | Write  |     ❌             |
| `snapshot`       | Write  |     ❌             |
| `clean`          | Read |      ✅           |

> | `compile`        | Read |      ✅           |

Reviewer 4: but i tested compile multiple times and found it also gives adapter error.

Author: Hey @hash-data , can you say more? Would love to see if this is something else or if it's indeed not supported. If it's something more, I would recommend opening an issue in the dbt core repo, however would love more context to help you out, thank you!

Reviewer 4: Hi @mirnawong1  i mentioned the issue here:  https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/9603
-> Issue i have metioned different commands 
-> But also I tried multiple compile comands which give the same KeyError

Reviewer 3: @hash-data @mirnawong1 This is why it's important we make a distinction between what's supported with:
- dbt-core (CLI or programmatic invocation), which does not support concurrency within the same process (but it's possible to achieve this with additional work)
- Cloud CLI, which does that additional work to manage concurrency (multiple processes) on the user's behalf

(more conversation in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/4952)
